UNIT 1: EXPLORING BUSINESS 
Pearson BTEC Level 3 National Extended Certificate in Business –  
Specification – Issue 14 – April 2023  © Pearson Education Limited 2023 
19 
Unit 1: Exploring Business 
Level: 3 
Unit type: Internal 
Guided learning hours: 90 
Unit in brief 
In this introductory unit, learners study the purposes of different businesses, their structure, the 
effect of the external environment, and how they need to be dynamic and innovative to survive. 
Unit introduction 
A business is any activity that provides goods or services, whether that is to make a profit or not. 
The common thread in business is that owners and employees are striving to satisfy customers. 
Nowadays, customers are more informed and have more options in terms of what they buy and 
who they buy from, so a successful business is one that balances satisfying their customers with 
selling products or providing services. 
In this unit, you will gain an overview of the key ingredients for business success, how businesses 
are organised, how they communicate, the characteristics of the environment in which they 
operate, and how this shapes them and their activities. You will also look at the importance of 
innovation and enterprise to the success and survival of businesses, with the associated risks  
and benefits.  
By developing relevant business knowledge and understanding, this unit will help you to progress  
to employment, vocational training and higher apprenticeships, or higher education. 
Learning aims 
In this unit you will: 
A Explore the features of different businesses and analyse what makes them 
successful 
B Investigate how businesses are organised 
C Examine the environment in which businesses operate 
D Examine business markets 
E Investigate the role and contribution of innovation and enterprise to business 
success. 
UNIT 1: EXPLORING BUSINESS 
Pearson BTEC Level 3 National Extended Certificate in Business –  
Specification – Issue 14 – April 2023  © Pearson Education Limited 2023 
20 
Summary of unit 
 
Learning aim Key content areas Recommended 
assessment approach 
A Explore the features of 
different businesses and 
analyse what makes them 
successful 
A1 Features of businesses 
A2 Stakeholders and their 
influence 
A3 Effective business 
communications 
A report that examines the 
features of two contrasting 
businesses, looking at how 
each is organised, how their 
structures enable achievement 
of their aims and objectives 
and the relationship and 
communication with 
stakeholders. 
B Investigate how businesses 
are organised 
B1 Structure and organisation 
B2 Aims and objectives 
C Examine the environment 
in which businesses 
operate 
C1 External environment 
C2 Internal environment 
C3 Competitive environment 
C4 Situational analysis A report that examines the 
effects of the internal and 
external environment on a 
large business and how the 
business has, and will,  
respond to changes. 
D Examine business markets D1 Different market structures 
D2 Relationship between 
demand, supply and price 
D3 Pricing and output 
decisions
 
E Investigate the role and 
contribution of innovation 
and enterprise to business 
success 
E1 Role of innovation and 
enterprise 
E2 Benefits and risks 
associated with innovation
 
A presentation that 
investigates the use of 
enterprise and innovation  
in an existing business. 
UNIT 1: EXPLORING BUSINESS 
Pearson BTEC Level 3 National Extended Certificate in Business –  
Specification – Issue 14 – April 2023  © Pearson Education Limited 2023 
21 
Content 
Learning aim A: Explore the features of different businesses and analyse what 
makes them successful 
A1 Features of businesses 
• Ownership and liability: 
o private, e.g. sole trader, partnership, private limited company, public limited 
company, cooperative, limited and unlimited liability 
o public, e.g. government department 
o not-for-profit, e.g. charitable trust, voluntary. 
• Purposes, e.g. supply of products or services, difference between for-profit and  
not-for-profit businesses. 
• Sectors: primary, secondary, tertiary, quaternary. 
• Scope of business activities: local, national, international. 
• Size: micro – up to nine staff; Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs); small – between  
10 and 49 staff; medium – between 50 and 249 staff; large – more than 250 staff. 
• Reasons for success: how these differ depending on the type of business (profit or  
non-profit), and its aims and objectives, e.g. clarity of vision, innovative products or 
processes. 
A2 Stakeholders and their influence 
• Stakeholders: 
o internal, e.g. managers, employees, owners 
o external, e.g. suppliers, lenders, competitors, debtors, creditors, customers, 
government agencies and departments (local, national, international), communities 
(local, national, international), pressure groups, interest groups. 
• The influence of stakeholders on business success, e.g. shareholder value; customers  
as long-term assets (strong customer service enables customer loyalty and retention); 
employee involvement, corporate social responsibility (community groups and interest 
groups). 
A3 Effective business communications 
Appropriate presentation and delivery of information to a given audience: 
• written presentations, e.g. financial, non-financial, formal and informal reports 
• oral presentations, e.g. computer projection/PowerPoint with speaker notes,  
video conferencing platforms 
• importance of communication to aid business success, e.g. social media,  
virtual communities. 
Learning aim B: Investigate how businesses are organised 
B1 Structure and organisation 
• Organisational structure, e.g. hierarchical, flat, matrix, holacratic. 
• Functional/operational areas, e.g. human resources, research and development,  
sales, marketing, purchasing, production and quality, finance, customer service,  
IT, administration. 
B2 Aims and objectives 
• Aims of businesses in different sectors – mission, vision and values: 
o private, e.g. making profits, profit maximisation, break-even, survival, growth,  
market leadership 
o public, e.g. service provision, cost control, value for money, service quality,  
meeting government standards 
o not-for-profit, e.g. education, housing, alleviating poverty, healthcare. 
• SMART (Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, Time constrained) objectives. 
UNIT 1: EXPLORING BUSINESS 
Pearson BTEC Level 3 National Extended Certificate in Business –  
Specification – Issue 14 – April 2023  © Pearson Education Limited 2023 
22 
Learning aim C: Examine the environment in which businesses operate 
C1 External environment 
• Political, e.g. government support, trading partners with other countries. 
• Economic, fiscal, monetary and other government policies, e.g. supply side policy, 
economic growth, exchange rates. 
• Social attitudes to saving, spending and debt; social responsibility requirements;  
change, e.g. to demographic trends, consumers’ tastes/preferences. 
• 