UNIT 2: DEVELOPING A MARKETING CAMPAIGN 
Pearson BTEC Level 3 National Extended Certificate in Business –  
Specification – Issue 14 – April 2023  © Pearson Education Limited 2023 
29 
Unit 2: Developing a Marketing Campaign 
Level: 3 
Unit type: External 
Guided learning hours: 90 
Unit in brief 
Learners will gain skills relating to, and an understanding of, how a marketing campaign is 
developed. 
Unit introduction 
Marketing is a dynamic field central to the success of any business. You will gain an understanding 
of how a marketing campaign is developed. You will explore different stages of the process that a 
business goes through when developing its campaign and develop your own campaign for a given 
product/service. 
You will examine the marketing aims and objectives for existing products/services and understand 
the importance of relevant, valid and appropriate research in relation to customers’ needs and 
wants. You will use given market research data and other information to make recommendations 
about the type of marketing campaign that a business should undertake. To complete the 
assessment task within this unit, you will need to draw on your learning from across your 
programme. 
This unit will give you an insight into how important marketing is to business. It will enable you  
to make an informed choice as to whether you want to specialise in marketing in employment, 
training or higher education. 
Summary of assessment 
This unit is assessed under supervised conditions. The Part A Research Pack is released to learners 
under low control conditions in the afternoon on the day before the Part B assessment, which will 
be sat in the morning session. Learners have access to Part A for a 2 hour preparation period with 
the Part B assessment being a 3 hour supervised session. The assessment is set and marked  
by Pearson. 
The number of marks for the unit is 70. 
The assessment availability is twice a year in December/January and May/June.  
Sample assessment materials will be available to help centres prepare learners for assessment. 
 
UNIT 2: DEVELOPING A MARKETING CAMPAIGN 
Pearson BTEC Level 3 National Extended Certificate in Business –  
Specification – Issue 14 – April 2023  © Pearson Education Limited 2023 
30 
Assessment outcomes 
AO1 Demonstrate knowledge and understanding of marketing principles, concepts, processes,  
key terms, data sources and definitions 
 
AO2 Analyse marketing information and data, demonstrating the ability to interpret the potential 
impact and influence on marketing campaigns 
 
AO3 Evaluate evidence to make informed judgements about how a marketing campaign should be 
planned, developed and adapted in light of changing circumstances 
 
AO4 Be able to develop a marketing campaign with appropriate justification, synthesising ideas and 
evidence from several sources to support arguments 
UNIT 2: DEVELOPING A MARKETING CAMPAIGN 
Pearson BTEC Level 3 National Extended Certificate in Business –  
Specification – Issue 14 – April 2023  © Pearson Education Limited 2023 
31 
Essential content 
The essential content is set out under content areas. Learners must cover all specified content 
before the assessment. 
A Introduction to the principles and purposes of marketing that underpin the 
creation of a rationale for a marketing campaign 
A1 The role of marketing 
• Principles and purposes of marketing: 
o anticipating demand 
o recognising demand 
o stimulating demand 
o satisfying demand. 
• Marketing aims and objectives: 
o understanding customer wants and needs 
o developing new products 
o improving profitability 
o increasing market share 
o diversification 
o increased brand awareness and loyalty. 
• Types of market – mass and niche market. 
• Market segmentation. 
• Branding, brand personality, brand image, unique selling point (USP), implications of 
business size for marketing activity, budgetary constraints, availability of specialist staff. 
A2 Influences on marketing activity 
• Internal influences: 
o cost of the campaign 
o availability of finance 
o expertise of staff 
o size and culture of the business. 
• External influences: 
o social 
o technological 
o economic 
o environmental 
o political 
o legal 
o ethical. 
B Using information to develop the rationale for a marketing campaign 
B1 Purpose of researching information to identify the needs and wants of customers 
• To identify target markets. 
• To identify size, structure and trends in the market. 
• To identify competition. 
UNIT 2: DEVELOPING A MARKETING CAMPAIGN 
Pearson BTEC Level 3 National Extended Certificate in Business –  
Specification – Issue 14 – April 2023  © Pearson Education Limited 2023 
32 
B2 Market research methods and use 
• Primary research, to include survey, interview, observation, trials, focus groups. 
• Secondary research: 
o internal – business data on customers and financial records to include loyalty cards 
and sales records 
o external – commercially published reports, government statistics, trade journals, 
media sources. 
• Importance of validity, reliability, appropriateness, currency, cost. 
• Quantitative and qualitative data, when and where used. 
• Sufficiency and focus of the research. 
• Selection and extraction. 
B3 Developing the rationale 
• Interpretation, analysis and use of data and other information to make valid marketing 
decisions. 
• Identification of any further sources of information that may be required. 
• Evaluation of the reliability and validity of the information obtained. 
• Product life cycle. 
C Planning and developing a marketing campaign 
C1 Marketing campaign activity 
• Selection of appropriate marketing aims and objectives to suit business goals. 
• Situational analysis: SWOT (Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, Threats) and PESTLE 
(Political, Economical, Social, Technological, Legal, Environmental). 
• Use of research data to determine target market. 
• Use of research data to conduct competitor analysis. 
C2 Marketing mix 
• Product development: form and function, packaging, branding. 
• Pricing strategies: penetration, skimming, competitor based, cost plus. 
• Promotional advertising, public relations (PR). Sponsorship, use of social and other media, 
guerrilla marketing, personal selling, product placement, digital marketing, corporate 
image. 
• Place, distribution channels: direct to end users (mail/online/auction), retailers, 
wholesalers. 
• Extended marketing mix: people, physical environment, process. 
C3 The marketing campaign 
• Content of the marketing message. 
• Selection of an appropriate marketing mix. 
• Selection of appropriate media. 
• Allocation of the campaign budget. 
• Timelines for the campaign, including monitoring. 
• How the campaign is to be evaluated. 
C4 Appropriateness of marketing campaign 
• How far the marketing activity reinforces and supports brand value. 
• The sustainability of marketing activities. 
• Flexibility of the campaign to enable response t